Rework "Day 2" docs for OS upgrades on downstream clusters (#380)
suse-edge/suse-edge.github.io: asciidoc/day2/downstream-cluster-os.adoc

====

The `OS upgrade procedure` revolves around deploying *SUC Plans* to downstream clusters. These plans then hold information about how and on which nodes to deploy the `os-pkg-update.service/os-migration.service`. For information regarding the structure of a *SUC Plan*, refer to the https://github.com/rancher/system-upgrade-controller?tab=readme-ov-file#example-plans[upstream] documentation.

`OS upgrade` SUC Plans are shipped in the following ways:

* Through a `GitRepo` resources - <<os-upgrade-suc-plan-deployment-git-repo>>

* Through a `Bundle` resource - <<os-upgrade-suc-plan-deployment-bundle>>

To determine which resource you should use, refer to <<day2-determine-use-case>>.

For a full overview of what happens during the _upgrade procedure_, refer to the <<os-update-overview>> section.

[#os-update-overview]
==== Overview

This section aims to describe the full workflow that the *_OS upgrade process_* goes throught from start to finish.

.OS upgrade workflow
image::day2_os_pkg_update_diagram.png[]

OS upgrade steps:

> . Based on his use-case, the user determines whether to use a *GitRepo* or a *Bundle* resource for the deployment of the `OS upgrade SUC Plans` to the desired downstream clusters. For information on how to map a *GitRepo/Bundle* to a specific set of downstream clusters, see https://fleet.rancher.io/gitrepo-targets[Mapping to Downstream Clusters].

Reviewer: Perhaps we should change this to "Based on their ..." ?

Author: Thanks, resolved.

.. If you are unsure whether you should use a *GitRepo* or a *Bundle* resource for the *SUC Plan* deployment, refer to <<day2-determine-use-case>>.

.. For *GitRepo/Bundle* configuration options, refer to <<os-upgrade-suc-plan-deployment-git-repo>> or <<os-upgrade-suc-plan-deployment-bundle>>.

> . The user deploys the configured *GitRepo/Bundle* resource to the `fleet-default` namespace in his `management cluster`. This is done either *manually* or thorugh the *Rancher UI* if such is available.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. The user deploys the configured *GitRepo/Bundle* resource to the `fleet-default` namespace in his `management cluster`. This is done either *manually* or through the *Rancher UI* if such is available.
```

Author: Fixed, thanks!

. <<components-fleet,Fleet>> constantly monitors the `fleet-default` namespace and immediately detects the newly deployed *GitRepo/Bundle* resource. For more information regarding what namespaces does Fleet monitor, refer to Fleet's https://fleet.rancher.io/namespaces[Namespaces] documentation.

. If the user has deployed a *GitRepo* resource, `Fleet` will reconcile the *GitRepo* and based on its *paths* and *fleet.yaml* configurations it will deploy a *Bundle* resource in the `fleet-default` namespace. For more information, refer to Fleet's https://fleet.rancher.io/gitrepo-content[GitRepo Contents] documentation.

. `Fleet` then proceeds to deploy the `Kubernetes resources` from this *Bundle* to all the targeted `downstream clusters`. In the context of `OS upgrades`, Fleet deploys the following resources from the *Bundle*:

> .. *Agent SUC Plan* - instructs *SUC* on how to do an OS upgrade on cluster *_agent_* nodes. Will *not* be interpreted if the cluster consists only from _control-plane_ nodes. Will execute after all control-plane *SUC* Plans have completed successfully.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. *Agent SUC Plan* - instructs *SUC* on how to do an OS upgrade on cluster *_agent_* nodes.  It is *not* interpreted if the cluster consists only from _control-plane_ nodes. It executes after all control-plane *SUC* plans have completed successfully.
```

. On the downstream cluster, *SUC* picks up the newly deployed *SUC Plans* and deploys an *_Update Pod_* on each node that matches the *node selector* defined in the *SUC Plan*. For information how to monitor the *SUC Plan Pod*, refer to <<monitor-suc-plans>>.

. The *Update Pod* (deployed on each node) *mounts* the script Secret and *executes* the `upgrade.sh` script that the Secret ships.

. The `upgrade.sh` proceeds to do the following:

.. Based on its configurations, determine whether the OS needs a package update, or it needs to be migrated.

.. Based on the above outcome it will create either a `os-pkg-update.service` (for package updates), or a `os-migration.service` (for migration). The service will be of type *oneshot* and will adopt the following workflow:

... For `os-pkg-update.service`:

> .... Update all package version on the node OS, by running `transactional-update cleanup up`

Reviewer 2: Is `transactional-update cleanup up` a command?

Author: Yes.

> .... After a successful `transactional-update`, shedule a system *reboot* so that the package version updates can take effect

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.... After a successful `transactional-update`, schedule a system *reboot* so that the package version updates can take effect
```

... For `os-migration.service`:

> .... Update all package version on the node OS, by running `transactional-update cleanup up`. Done to ensure that no old package versions will cause an OS migration error

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.... Update all package version on the node OS, by running `transactional-update cleanup up`. This is done to ensure that no old package versions causes an OS migration error.
```

.... Proceed to migrate the OS to the desired values. Migration is done by utilising the `zypper migration` command.

> .... Shedule a system *reboot* so that the migration can take effect

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.... Schedule a system *reboot* so that the migration can take effect
```

> .. Start the `os-pkg-update.service/os-migration.service` and wait for it to complete

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. Start the `os-pkg-update.service/os-migration.service` and wait for it to complete.
```

> .. Cleanup the `os-pkg-update.service/os-migration.service` - after the *_systemd.service_* has done its job, it is removed from the system in order to ensure that no accidental executions/reboots happen in the future.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. Cleanup the `os-pkg-update.service/os-migration.service` after the *_systemd.service_* has done its job. It is removed from the system to ensure that no accidental executions/reboots happen in the future.
```

> The OS upgrade procedure finishes with the *_system reboot_*. After the reboot the OS package versions will be upgraded and depending if the Edge release requires it, the OS might be migrated as well.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The OS upgrade procedure finishes with the *_system reboot_*. After the reboot, the OS package versions are upgraded and if the Edge release requires it, the OS might be migrated as well.
```

. From here you can create the Bundle in one of the following ways:

> .. By manually copying the *Bundle* content to the *Create from YAML* page. Content can be retrieved from https://raw.githubusercontent.com/suse-edge/fleet-examples/$\{REVISION\}/bundles/day2/system-upgrade-controller-plans/os-upgrade/os-upgrade-bundle.yaml, where `$\{REVISION\}` is the Edge link:https://github.com/suse-edge/fleet-examples/releases[release] that you are using

Reviewer 2: Is `$\{REVISION\}` defined in the variable file? If not, it will lead to a 404 error.

Author: `$\{REVISION\}` Is intended to be changed by the user to the correct repository tag revision. So for 3.1, users should change the url from `ttps://raw.githubusercontent.com/suse-edge/fleet-examples/$\{REVISION\}/bundles/day2/system-upgrade-controller-plans/os-upgrade/os-upgrade-bundle.yaml` to `ttps://raw.githubusercontent.com/suse-edge/fleet-examples/release-3.1/bundles/day2/system-upgrade-controller-plans/os-upgrade/os-upgrade-bundle.yaml`

This is explained in this section:
```
where `$\{REVISION\}` is the Edge link:https://github.com/suse-edge/fleet-examples/releases[release] that you are using
```
